arming
MY PON
PQNK Knowledge Paper: Universal Applicability of the PQNK Model
From soil to food
1 Introduction: The basic principle of PQNK
The question asked by Usman, a Nigerian farmer, was very insightful and fundamental in nature.
This points to a common misconception: that PQN is only a name for a few techniques limited to crop and soil management.
To clarify: PQN is not a technique, but a basic philosophy. Its unshakable principle is:
In terms of nutrition, all life ultimately depends on the nutritional quality of the plant.
Whether the end product is honey, eggs, milk, meat or fish, the basic food is always provided by plants.
The PQN model says that when we restore a plant to its "pure" or "natural" health, we automatically eat that plant.
The health, stamina and productivity of each creature is improved.
2 Angle of PKNK: Unbreakable chain of nutrition
Input-Cost-to-Output-Value Ratio is the biggest problem of modern agricultural world. Poultry farming, fish farming, etc
Farmers' costs on dairy farms continue to rise, while animal health and production remain substandard.
PQN fixes this problem at its root. The chart below shows the universal system of PQNK:
Page 1 of 5
PON KE
PQNK Foundation
Healthy Soil
Mineral & Microbe Balance
Superior Feed & Fodder
Highly Digestible
Nutrient-Rich
Healthy Plant
High Brix & Nutrient-Dense
working
Animal & Aquatic Health
Universal Outcomes:
• Reduced Feed Costs
• Lower Mortality
• Enhanced Productivity
• Premium Quality Products
Poultry
Livestock
Aquaculture
Beekeeping
.3 Practical application of PQNK in agricultural sectors
A) KVN in poultry
Problem: Dependence on expensive and medicated feed, high mortality rate, poor feed conversion ratio, and weak egg shells.
PQN Solutions: When chickens are fed grains, vegetables and insects grown under PQN,
These plants have a higher Brix level (sugar and mineral content) and are more digestible.
Result:
Low feed cost. Because chickens get full nutrition by eating less.
o Improved health Less need for antibiotics due to stronger immune system.
Quality improvement: Eggs have stronger shells, darker yolks, and richer flavors. The meat
It becomes tougher, stronger and tastier.
Page 2 of 5
b) BQ Amin K in Aquaculture (Fish).
PON YE
Problem: High cost of feed, water pollution from feed waste, and spread of diseases.
B
NK Solutions PQN systems produce nutrient-rich aquatic plants (eg azolla, duckweed) and in and out of the pond.
Creates a natural system of healthy insects and microbes. Fish grown on these plants are healthier and stronger.
Less feed cost. A large proportion of expensive feed is supplemented with natural food.
Clean water leads to less waste due to more digestible food
is
Healthy fish - natural resistance to germs, better growth.
QNK only in cattle and dairy
Problem: The economic ratio of milk and feed is disastrous. Feed costs in conventional systems go up to 72% of the milk price, which
It is almost impossible to profit from it.
PQN Solutions: This is the area where PQN gives the most extraordinary results.
Acres cultivated under a PQNK when diverse and high Brix forages are grown such as grasses, legumes, trees, etc.
The food potential of the land would increase many times
is
Economic revolution - feed costs limited to 22-30%.
Increasing Capacity - Pakistan's example is clear: from 3-4 buffaloes to 13 animals per acre.
is
Improved health - reduction in mastitis, hoof problems and metabolic diseases.
Page 3 of 5
PUT ME
arming
Quality milk and meat are more nutritious, better tasting, and have higher levels of CLA.
d) PKN in bees (Apiculture).
f)
Problem: Weak hives, less honey, and Colony Collapse Disorder -
PQN Solutions: The food of bees is nectar and pollen. More flowers grown under PQNK
Produces minerals, sugars and nutritious juices.
Stronger hives, more disease resistance, more honey, higher quality.
Conclusion: PQN is a universal key
For farmers in poultry, fish, dairy and all other sectors, PQN is completely for you.
If PQNK is seen in pieces, it may appear that it is only a cropping system. But when it as a complete system?
If seen, it becomes clear that:
PQNK is the master key that unlocks stability, sustainability and profitability throughout the agricultural world.
Don't limit LQNK to just crops. It's a whole food base
Jahir
When the foundation is right, everything built upon it becomes right. Adopting a PQN is not about replacing your skills, but about it
To build on the strongest foundation.
Adopt PQN. Feed the plant and it will feed the whole world.
margin:
Any agricultural method which submerges the land in water, or disturbs its natural structure by plowing,
Or leave the soil bare without organic mulch. It does not conform to the principles of natural environmental science for production.
Page 4 of 5
arming
PON YE
PQNK - (PQNK) which is pronounced "Piknik" means: sustainable natural farming system
Namely: self-regenerating, sustainable and truly organic agricultural systems.
www.Facebook.Com/Pedaver
https://www.youtube.com/@pedaverpqnk3167/videos
pedaver@gmail.com
WhatsApp +92320677 6666
Page 5 of 5