PQNK (Paedar Qudratti Nizam e Kashatqari)
Sustainable natural farming system
In prehistoric times, the human race lived in communes for collective survival, protection
and food security. Tribes settled
near water and vegetation for food supplies, and
in areas considered safe from wild animals and competing tribes.
Food was collected and served from natural vegetation, which was biodiverse. Food
collection areas were large, therefore, threatening and laborious.
Inherent to nature is that it always let vegetation increase, and it does this by a system of
seed distribution. Some seeds are light in weight and drift by air to distant locations, whilst
others hide in food that animals and humans could eat and spread. In the natural habitat,
the plant is the only living being that produces its own food and food for other species.
Food seeds collected by humans were thrown nearby, which would germinate and grow.
Humans found that if crop plants are grown nearby in a concentrated form, it would be
easier to collect the food without threats from challenging tribes and wildlife.
It was observed that most of the seeds thrown on a patch of land do not germinate. Birds
and other species would take it away. It was discovered that most of the seeds germinated
when it was buried in the soil. This was the start of agriculture, as we see it today.
Tools were improvised to bury the seed without much labour. Later domesticated animals
were used. Growing food this way focused on making seed germinate by burying it in soil,
but without understanding the functioning of the soil, water, plant, microbes and the overall
natural ecosystem for soil fertility and vegetation. This agricultural method continued for
thousands of years without noticeable effects on the quality of the topsoil. This was mainly
because the demand for food was much less due to the smaller population. But also
because their agricultural method relied on animal power, not tractors.
In a natural ecosystem, the land is neither levelled nor ploughed. Rain and dew are meant
for the water supply. The soil absorbs the water, and the organic mulch preserves the soil
with the water. Therefore the mulch avoids water's runoff (taking along the top layer of the
soil), preventing evaporation through capillaries. Seed is distributed for propagation
through its spreading mechanism.
At the stage of modernisation, humans had two options, either
to go back to natural habitats and learn from natural processes of soil fertility and
vegetation to build a sustainable approach for future agricultural production, a
practice that is in line with the natural ecosystem, or
keep on building on evolved methods.
AS/M 12.8.21
pedaver@gmail.com www.facebook.com/pedaver
Page 1 of 9
Unfortunately, the second option, the ongoing practices based on evolved tillage based
farming, was followed and augmented.
Natural ecosystem
Evolved practices
Redundant suppliers of World War chemicals and war equipment formed a cartel. They
founded and funded the so-called 'Green Revolution', which was a disguise for Industrial
Agriculture. By making their image green and therefore have the appearance of being
natural, they could develop a market for inputs manufactured by them: farm machinery and
(agro)chemicals.
Science has shown that every soil has an abundance of all minerals that could be needed
for vigorous growth. However, those minerals are in a sustainable form. The plants need
the biota in the natural ecosystem to convert these minerals from sustainable to plant-
available form. Killing this biota, which is what the agrochemicals do, made room for
selling even more agrochemicals.
The universities' funding source made academia continue to evolve on the process that
replaced the natural ecosystem. Their research continued on equipment (mostly ploughs)
and soil chemistry. However, in a natural ecosystem, biology replaces chemistry; but the
sane voices were censored.
Our journey for modernisation started back in 1972. It was in that year that we began
mechanisation on our family farm. Traditionally only summer crops were planted due to the
non-availability of canal water in winter. When we started the family farm, there were no
tube-wells to pump the groundwater. A tube-well got installed, and the land was properly
designed to make long fields for furrow irrigation. Cotton, wheat and sugarcane were the
principal crops. Later, we added potato and corn. The soil was marked in a traditional
method, and after preparing the seedbed, potato seeds were placed by hand and
manually covered with soil. Yields were low, up to five tons per acre. The ridge's sizes.
were not more than eight inches (20,32 cm). We brought in mechanical ridgers to plant all
AS/M 12.8.21
pedaver@gmail.com
www.facebook.com/pedaver
Page 2 of 9
Hand dribbled
Ridge planting
Raised-bed
Raised-bed mulched
Yield: 40 bags
5 ton per acre
Yield: 120 bags
15 ton per acre
Yield: 200 bags
24 ton per acre
No-till, No irrigation
No input, more yield
our crops on ridges, including potatoes. Yield increased from five tonnes to fifteen tonnes
per acre. This made us realise the importance of the process. With the change in process
(see picture above), yield increased to three times more, without any other modifications.
We kept on making improvements for getting closer to precision agriculture, using syphon
tubes for furrow irrigation to manage the water, a side dressing of fertilisers instead of
broadcasting it, and later fertigation and foliar applications. We introduced pneumatic
precision planters to save seeds because it established an accurate seed to seed
distance. And we brought in improved seed varieties: crosses, hybrids and GMO's, but
yield stagnated and later declined.
While visiting Brazil, we visited the Amazon rainforest. We were amazed to see thriving
vegetation without depletion of any resources. No fertiliser applications had been used for
the growth of the plants and not even agrochemicals for protecting the plants from pests
and diseases.
We pondered which steps are taken in Industrial Agriculture that goes against natural soil
fertility and vegetation algorithms. We discovered that Industrial Agriculture does things.
that go against the natural ecosystem. In the natural ecosystem, there is:
1. No inundation of soil
2. No disturbance of soil
3. Soil coverage with organic mulch
4. Biodiversity
When we arrived back home, we decided to follow 'natures recommendations' in our
production system. The first step was to replicate nature by keeping upland for
vegetation and lowland for water supply and drainage of excessive water. This was not
easy and a big challenge in practicalities. We came up with raised beds, and a
machine was designed to make the raised beds. See picture.
Our experimentation started on rice crop, which was known to be the most water
demanding crop, and therefore, rather challenging. Forty-four acres of land were selected
to carry out the experiment, four acres as a control group and forty acres for the trial.
AS/M 12.8.21
pedaver@gmail.com www.facebook.com/pedaver
Page 3 of 9
While searching for new rice production methods, we came across the website of Cornell
University and found the SRI method (System of Rice Intensification). Most of SRI steps
were already in practice in our production system, like plant spacing, soil aeration and
water management. We decided to apply SRI on our raised beds. The experiment was a
huge success! We used seventy per cent fewer inputs (agrochemicals) and had almost
four times more yield. An article was published by 'Paddy and Water Environment', titled
"Technical adaptations for mechanised SRI production to achieve water saving and
increased profitability in Punjab, Pakistan", available on Springer. DOI:10.1007/s10333-010-0223-5
This success made us realise that what water is to a plant is what blood is to us, namely a
nutrition carrier. The amount of water that transpires from the plant's leaves is the quantity
that plant needs for vigorous growth. We discovered four factors that determine plant
water requirement:
1. leaf surface area
2. ambient temperature
3. humidity in the air, and
4. wind velocity.
Water lost by
transpiration
Suction
Pressure
Capillarity
clorStock
PLAC
210
Vector Stock
VectorStock
Water
absorbed
by root hairs
AS/M 12.8.21 pedaver@gmail.com www.facebook.com/pedaver
Q123R
VectorStock
Page 4 of 9
The leaves' size, shape and canopy, and external conditions determine the transpiration
rate. Transpiration rate is designed on minerals required for the plant's output in a given
climate.
When we realised that the soil's inundation was against the natural ecosystem, we went
through a transition of irrigation systems. We started with a periodical irrigation regimen to
eventually end with Soil Moisture Management (SMM). All the underneath mentioned, we
have tried, before we found Soil Moisture Management.
1. Flood irrigation
2. Furrow irrigation
3. Sprinkler and drip irrigation
4. Raised bed irrigation
5. Soil Moisture Management (SMM). With SMM, there are no
losses from evaporation.
Sprinkler
Drip
Flood
Soil Moisture Managemen - SMM
Furrow
Raised-bed
The raised bed system made a fundamental improvement for
everything that we grow. Underneath a list of the benefits of the
raised bed system:
Controlled traffic; the tires go through the furrows. Therefore,
no compaction of the soil in the raised beds.
No water runoff. The water gets absorbed to its maximum,
which is needed for consistent growth.
It concentrates the water-nutrient solution necessary for
optimal uptake by the plants.
Biota is fostered in the raised beds, preventing them from
drowning.
Biota converts plant residue to maintain mineral levels in the soil.
Organic mulch moderates the soil's temperature. This protects the biota from extreme
temperatures, as well as that it stops water loss by evaporation through capillaries, and it
stops salinisation on the soil's surface.
No-till planting protects the mycorrhizal fungi network and prevents tillage costs. The no-
till plan improves water absorption, water infiltration, and water retention.
The excessive water gets drained in the case of heavy rains.
The roots grow longer to reach the moisture-nutrients solution. The longer roots, the
better the plants are anchored. This avoids lodging in stormy weather conditions.
AS/M 12.8.21
pedaver@gmail.com www.facebook.com/pedaver
Page 5 of 9
Storage, movement and usage of water:
We need to understand water circulation before we suggest solutions for scarcity.
The water cycle is the continuous movement of water, above and below ground,
The masses of water on earth remained constant over time,
Distinguishing the water in reservoirs of ice, freshwater, saline water, atmospheric water
and underground water,
The water moves from one reservoir to another, like a river to an ocean, or from the
ocean to the atmosphere. For this are necessary: physical processes of evaporation,
condensation, precipitation, infiltration, surface runoff, and subsurface flow.
• Whilst circulating, the water goes through different forms: liquid, solid (ice), vapour
(clouds/fog) and gas (humidity in the air)
The water cycle and the hydrological effects on the climate are massive. Two factors made
the imbalance:
1. Overmining of underground water
2. Reduced water absorption in soil by unsustainable agriculture.
Billions of tons of water stored in the soil for billions of years are now excessively floating
in the atmosphere, which has imbalanced the ecosystem, causing climate devastations.
PQNK is inclusive of all...
PQNK is a crop production process that not only manifolds farmers profitability but
also regenerates the soil,
PQNK converts absorbed CO2 by plants into Stable Soil Carbon (SSC). By
retaining SSC in the soil we help the environment because it reduces the usage of
water,
PQNK almost eliminates fossil fuels usage, eliminates the usage of agrochemicals,
and improves the yield.
❖ PQNK produces ultimate natural nutrition-dense quality.
❖PQNK provides the foundation for the adaptation of all planting methods.
PQNK is a holistic approach to agriculture with the potential for mass scale.
PQNK is gradually adaptable, giving people the choice to adopt it as much or as
little as they wish.
PQNK means a better future for us all. Implementing PQNK increases yield (the
population is growing) with less cost and higher nutrition density.
PQNK, however, being a paradigm shift from our current agriculture practices, is difficult to
be accepted. It is simple but totally different from what all our agriculture experts have
learned during their academic and practical life. In other words, adopting PQNK means
that all their knowledge about fertiliser's usage, pest and weed management by the usage
of chemicals, water use efficiency, even the crop production process itself will become
redundant. It is but natural that they just can't waste time acquiring knowledge on
something that their scientific knowledge says is just not possible.
This is the primary reason that we need to do more than normal to propagate PQNK.
AS/M 12.8.21 pedaver@gmail.com
www.facebook.com/pedaver
Page 6 of 9
A USA based practitioner of PA/PQNK, Mr Mark Fulford:
"It can be said that there are other advancing agronomists around the globe who have not
been completely 'numbed' by academic rigidity and are open-minded academic promoters
of Mr Asif Sharif's work. Still, a few others of the commercial sector are also not tainted by
chemical salesmanship, including a few here in the US who are watching this PQNK with
great interest and are beginning to apply the practices with surprising success. As Mr Asif
Sharif points out, this is not an easy shift, and in the West, most farms are locked into non-
synchronous and clumsy yet very expensive oversized equipment that compromises soils,
thus yields and economic advancement, yet, big is not necessarily better. What is at stake
cannot be underestimated. It goes well beyond political borders. Pakistan is exceedingly
fortunate to have Mr Sharif as a resource of wisdom and farsightedness. A nation that
rebuilds its soils rebuilds its original wealth. MBF / Maine, USA".
Our next target was to keep the soil covered with organic mulch by using no-till planting
machinery. It was the unification of SRI with CA (Conservation Agriculture). In the Punjab
region of Pakistan, the land is fertile, the wide-reaching canal irrigation system is in place,
and seasons are such that crops can be grown around the year; farmers get two to four
crops from a piece of land in a calendar year. This is a problem for no-till machinery.
Farmers expect to plant the next crop soon after the harvest. The plant's residue is not
brittle and is thick, especially rice, sugarcane and maise. Machines are being continuously
improved to overcome these challenges.
After making the rice crop successful on raised beds and reducing the water usage by at
least seventy per cent compared to the conventional method, we moved on to wheat and
other crops.
Conventionally, wheat is planted with random seeders, using forty to sixty kilograms of
seed per acre. Using the SRI technique of providing optimum space to each plant, above
and below ground, as in rice, we decided to plant sixty-two thousand seeds to get fifty-
eight thousand plants per acre at nine by nine-inch row-to-row and plant-to-plant distance.
No purchased input was applied. The results were amazing. Some plants had eighty-six
tillers; the average was thirty-seven. Crop pictures are placed below. Cost of production
reduced from Pkr 1,160 to less than Pkr 100 per forty kilograms yield.
20 plants, 720 tillers in a SQM: 37 per plant
62,000 seeds of wheat per acre (2.2 - 3.5 Kg) in place of 40/60 kg
up to 86 panicles per seed/plant - 80% saving in water, no purchased input
Production cost is reduced from 1,160 to less than 100 Rs / 40 Kg
AS/M 12.8.21 pedaver@gmail.com www.facebook.com/pedaver
Page 7 of 9
Similar amazing results
are experienced from
most other crops grown,
such as Corn, Potato,
Cotton, Sugarcane. Just
look at the colour of
potato plant leaves; it is
amazingly unbelievable.
The same process was
applied on our troubled
citrus grove, where plants
were dying for no obvious
reasons; it was a kind of
sudden death of plants,
despite excessive usage
of fertilisers, plant
nutrients, pest- and
disease management.
When the orchards were moved on to raised beds under live mulch, like alfalfa, plants
recovered and produced exceptionally more and better quality fruit, see pictures.
AS/M 12.8.21 pedaver@gmail.com www.facebook.com/pedaver
Page 8 of 9
Paradoxical Agricultures is a new branch of science for production agriculture, entirely
based on the natural processes of soil fertility and vegetation; the science of the natural
ecosystem. We are getting higher yields than conventional agriculture, without any
purchased input, except for seed and little water. Placed below is the complete process for
easy understanding:
Paradoxical Agriculture PA/PQNK: is natural
algorithm of soil fertility & vegetation
• Nature created upland
for vegetation &
lowland for aquatic life
Mulched soil preserve
rain & dew water for
year around need
Vegetation produce its
own food & for rest of
us, by thriving within
the natural ecosystem
Furrows
Best water use efficiency, highest
crop yields at lowest production
cost. Nutrition dense eatables,
better than organic standard
Agroecology is
PA/PQNK
highly productive
self-sustained
ECOSYSTEM
No water
evaporation,
moderate soil
temperature
Water
use efficiency
is next to
none!
Organic Mulch
Thriving Crop
Horizontal water
movement
Water
Moist Soil
252MA
Hardpan is
created by
Soil
No purchased
tractor tire
Fostering Biota ood, Feed,
input is required nates
compaction
AS/M 12.8.21 pedaver@gmail.com www.facebook.com/pedaver
Page 9 of 9